<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>List of Illustrations</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="backmatter">
		<nav id="loi" epub:type="loi">
			<h2 epub:type="title">List of Illustrations</h2>
			<ol>
				<li>
					<p>
						<a href="chapter-2.xhtml#illustration-1">A diagram consisting of three lines of text, followed by one line of characters and symbols, followed by one more line of text. The lines of text just have numbers showing; the remaining characters are simply full stops. The line of characters and symbols reads: D, DF under a line, a rectangle, 19 F + 44, a right triangle lying on the hypotenuse with a dot at the left corner, 357, and the same triangle flipped horizontally.</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>
						<a href="chapter-3.xhtml#illustration-2">A diagram consisting of four lines of text with just vowels showing; the remaining letters are simply full stops.</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>
						<a href="chapter-8.xhtml#illustration-3">A diagram consisting of three lines of text, followed by one line of characters and symbols, followed by one more line of text. The lines of text just have vowels showing; the remaining letters are simply full stops. The line of characters and symbols reads: D, DF under a line, a rectangle, 19 F + 44, a right triangle lying on the hypotenuse with a dot at the left corner, 357, and the same triangle flipped horizontally.</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>
						<a href="chapter-9.xhtml#illustration-4">A diagram consisting of one line of characters and symbols. It reads: D, DF under a line, a rectangle, 19 F + 44, a right triangle lying on the hypotenuse with a dot at the left corner, 357, and the same triangle flipped horizontally.</a>
					</p>
				</li>
			</ol>
		</nav>
	</body>
</html>
